Hey, it's Michael. Before we start the
show, we want to let you know that our
colleague, Pulitzer Prize winning
culture critic and host of the Times
podcast Cannonball, Wesley Morris, is
going to be hosting a live event next
week at the Tribeca Festival.
Wesley will be talking to the actress
and activist Cynthia Nixon.
They'll be having a conversation about
great works of art about New York, which
makes sense given Nixon's starring role
in arguably one of them, Sex and the
City.
It promises to be a very fun and very
smart evening.
The show is Friday, June 12th at 6:00
p.m. and you can get your tickets at
tribecafilm.com/audio.
That's tribecafilm.com/audio.
Okay, here's today's show.
From The New York Times, I'm Michael
Barbaro. This is The Daily. [music]
>> [music]
>> Today,
the story of how President [music] Trump
begrudgingly accepted that the most
transformational technology of our time,
artificial intelligence, requires
government oversight.
>> [music]
>> My colleague, Trip Mickle, takes us
inside [music] the dramatic White House
battle that has played out over the past
few weeks
>> [music]
>> and previews the coming fight over just
how far federal [music] regulation of AI
should go.
It's
>> [music]
>> Thursday, June 4th.
Trip, welcome back to The Daily.
>> Thanks so much for having me.
>> I want you to explain exactly what
President Trump did a few days ago on
Tuesday.
>> On Tuesday morning, as I was in the
middle of my commute, I was bombarded
with text messages saying that President
Trump had
to many people's surprise, signed an
executive order to regulate artificial
intelligence. And it gives the
government for the first time really,
under the Trump administration,
oversight over AI models. This is a a
big change for an administration that
has had a an entirely hands-off approach
to regulating the tech industry and the
companies that are pushing artificial
intelligence forward.
>> Mhm.
>> What the government has done is said
that AI companies will share their
models voluntarily with the government
about 30 days before they're released
publicly, so that the government can
review the models and figure out if
there any software vulnerabilities that
they could attack. And then that would
allow the government to patch those
vulnerabilities and prevent a cyber
attack by a foreign adversary or just a
bad actor.
>> This seems like a relatively big ask,
which is let us, the government, take a
look at your
software before the world, before all
the businesses that want it, get a
chance
to buy it. What's the story
behind why this administration that has
been so hands-off decided at long last
that it should be in the business of
regulating artificial intelligence?
>> Well, it it's been on a journey. And
that journey began last year when
President Trump came into office. And
one of the first things he did was sign
an executive order that repealed and and
scrapped all of the rules from the Biden
era that were designed to bring some
safety processes to bear on artificial
intelligence.
And Trump would explain why he did this
by saying
>> To make America great again, we're going
to make this industry absolutely the top
because right now it's it's a beautiful
baby that's born. We have to
grow that baby and let that baby thrive.
>> The AI industry is a beautiful baby and
you don't want rules to get in the way
of a beautiful baby when it's taking its
first steps.
>> [music]
>> You just want it to take its first steps
essentially and let it start to run.
>> And we can't stop it. We can't stop it
with
politics. We can't stop [music] it with
foolish rules and even stupid rules.
At the same time
>> And that was
the administration's philosophy and that
philosophy was really
cultivated and encouraged by David
Sacks, the White House AI czar. David is
a venture capitalist. He's [music]
pretty much a libertarian and he
believes that any rules would get in the
way of technologies advancement and
development. And he wins the president's
ear with two arguments.
>> If the US continues to lead in AI, we
will remain the most powerful country,
but if we don't,
we could fall behind our global
competitors like China.
>> On one hand, like the geopolitical
competition between superpowers, between
the United States and China for who's
going to control this technology that
clearly has the potential to define the
next century.
>> And I think you could argue that the AI
race is even more important than the
space race because it's going to
determine who reshapes the global
economy and who the superpowers of the
21st century are going to be.
>> And on the other hand, he's also focused
on the economic opportunity of this
technology and how can the United States
harness that economic opportunity.
There's a reason that our economy is
driven by tech now and it's because of a
largely hands-off approach [music]
during a previous era.
>> Mhm.
So, given just how
entrenched this thinking appears to be
inside the Trump administration,
embraced by the president and the person
that the president turns to for advice
on the AI industry, what ultimately
changes
this thinking and leads to the executive
order?
>> In April, the entire tech industry got a
wake-up call and so did Washington. And
that is because Anthropic, which is one
of the leading developers of artificial
intelligence in the country, announced
that it had made a new model called
Mythos that it said was very skilled at
detecting and identifying
vulnerabilities in software and could be
weaponized by people who wanted to do
cyberattacks. And all of a sudden,
everybody starts to think,
"Oh goodness, like what are the downside
risk here? Like what are the
possibilities?"
>> And what are the possibilities?
>> These are really powerful systems and
they can be used by bad actors to hack
into the electric grid or hack into bank
accounts, to steal money, to all of a
sudden overnight turn off all the lights
in New York City and create mass panic.
Anthropic said that it was so dangerous
that it couldn't even release it to the
public and instead was creating a
bespoke group of 40 companies that were
going to get early access to this model
so that they could figure out how it
might be used to find vulnerabilities in
their software systems.
And concerns about this new model
reverberate from the West Coast to the
East Coast.
First you have Microsoft, which has
written most of the software code that
the US government relies on, calling the
administration and saying, "Hey, this is
a big deal. You need to take this
seriously." And then on the East Coast,
you have figures like Jamie Dimon
putting calls into the administration
and saying, "Look, like this is a risk
for banks. You all need to take this
seriously."
>> Jamie Dimon, of course, being the CEO of
JP Morgan Chase, the banking giant.
>> Right. And this gets the ear of Scott
Bessent and Susie Wiles. Scott Bessent
being the Treasury Secretary, Susie
Wiles being the Chief of Staff. They
worry that if there is a cyber attack,
if there is some use of this technology
in a in a way that that shocks the
American public, that if the
administration continues to have a
hands-off approach, it will look like it
didn't enable that. And so they start to
talk about, "Well, what what could we
do? Like we we're literally doing
nothing now. How do we take a step
forward of some sort [music] and begin
to get our arms around where this
technology is going in the future?"
>> So all of a sudden, after this hands-off
approach has persisted and prevailed,
there's now a countervailing force
inside the White House, Bessent and
Wiles saying, "Wait a minute. We could
have a real problem here. Let's slow
this down. Let's have a conversation
about what actually a hands-on approach
might look like. And where does that
go?"
>> In May, Scott Bessent and Susie Wiles
begin to organize conversations within
the administration about how it could
regulate the industry. And they begin
talking to AI companies about what
approaches might be okay with the
companies. Now,
this is an administration that's trying
to walk a tightrope here, right? I mean,
they have said that we are very
pro-innovation. We don't want any rules.
And so they don't want to fully abandon
that idea, but they want to also take a
baby step forward or some step forward
so that they do have some guardrails in
place. And what they wind up coming up
with is this idea of an up to 90-day
window when they could review artificial
intelligence models and assess whether
or not those models are capable of
finding software vulnerabilities. In
essence, it wouldn't tell
tech companies what they can't do, but
it would allow the government to absorb
information about what their technology
can do so that the government is
prepared for that and can help other key
groups like banks and utilities also be
prepared for those risks. And so a draft
of the executive order as written, the
administration schedules assigning
ceremony in the Oval Office on Thursday,
May 21st, and they begin to ask and
invite chief executives to come to
Washington to be there for this event.
And in the run-up to that event, a
couple of things
>> Joining me now is White House National
Economic Council Director Kevin Hassett.
Kevin, it's great to have you this
morning. Welcome.
>> Good to be here.
>> One, Kevin Hassett, the head of the
National Economic Council, goes on Fox
TV
>> doing we're studying possibly an
executive order to give a clear road map
to everybody about how future AIs that
also potentially create vulnerabilities
should go through a process so that, you
know, they're released into the wild
after they've been proven safe, just
like an FDA drug.
>> and describes the process that they're
considering as something akin to what
the FDA does for drug approvals.
>> Mhm.
>> An FDA for AI that would vet, you heard
that correct, folks, that would vet new
models for safety, the thing we've been
talking about not doing here, the thing
David Sacks
>> This freaks out Silicon Valley
constituents and leads to real worry
that the administration's going to slow
down the development of artificial
intelligence and basically just slam the
brakes on it. In the same way that it's
like really hard to get a new drug out
the door, they fear that it's going to
be really hard to get new artificial
intelligence models out the door. And
Thursday morning rolls around and it's
time for President Trump to gear up to
sign
this executive order.
And that morning
he begins to get skeptical about it and
say, "What what is this on my calendar?"
And he calls he starts calling
he starts calling tech executives and
saying, "Hey, what do you think of
this?" And so he he speaks to a number
of tech executives including Mark
Zuckerberg, Marc Andreessen the venture
capitalist who has a tremendous amount
of influence on the White House and most
importantly David Sacks. And David Sacks
tells him directly, "Don't sign this.
This is a bad idea."
And
within a few hours of that the
president's on TV doing another event.
>> Why is today's executive order on AI
been postponed and
>> Because I didn't like certain aspects of
it. I postponed it. I think it gets in
the way of
you know we're leading China we're
leading everybody and I don't want to do
anything that's going to get in the way
of
>> And he says that he's canceling the
executive order he's signing of it
because he's concerned that it's going
to create rules that slow down the
industry.
>> Uh I I really thought that could have
been a blocker and I want to make sure
that it's not.
>> [clears throat]
>> This feels like a pretty decisive
victory for the AI industry and for the
David Sacks faction of those advising
the president but we know that it's a
temporary victory because Trump does end
up signing some version of an executive
order. So, after he changes his mind and
cancels the first one,
what makes him want to sign it all over
again?
>> There's persistence from Susie Wiles and
Scott Bessent that something still needs
to happen. And over
roughly the 2 weeks that follow, they
continue to push this notion forward and
the president convenes a meeting this
Monday at the White House with David
Sacks,
Scott Bessent, Defense Secretary Pete
Hoekstra, and other principals who have
a vested interest in this. And they
basically wrestle with, "How do we get
this done?"
And in the course of that conversation,
there are a few changes made to the
executive order. One is that that 90-day
window is reduced to up to 30 days.
>> So, cut down by a third. That's a lot.
>> Yeah, that's a lot. And there's there's
a line added about how nothing in the
executive order can be construed to
authorize a mandatory government
licensing, pre-clearance, or permitting
process to be put in place.
>> Mhm.
>> Those changes
win David Sacks' blessing and on Tuesday
morning
with almost with zero fanfare and no
advance notice to tech companies,
uh the White House posted a notification
on its website saying that President
Trump has signed the executive order and
it is now policy.
>> Hm. Well, given how watered down this
executive order ultimately becomes, from
90 days to 30 days with all these
stipulations of what it's not, and given
how quietly
Trump signed it,
how should we think about
this regulation and how meaningful or
not it really is?
>> It is small by design, no doubt about
it. But, it shows how the ground has
shifted in Washington on AI policy.
And the door is now been cracked open to
have a bigger conversation about whether
or not there should be other rules or
regulations in the future. Remember,
this technology is moving really, really
fast, and everyone was blindsided in
April. So, you know, trying to catch up
to where the technology is going is
where a lot of people's head is right
now in Washington.
>> [music]
[music]
>> We'll be right back.
Tripp, I want to turn to this bigger
conversation that's happening in
Washington about what the right level of
regulation for AI is. I mean, obviously
the way that the factions inside the
White House resolve this debate was
through this baby step of this executive
order. My sense is that beyond the White
House, there's less interest in just
baby steps.
>> Yes, I mean, and there has been a steady
drumbeat that has increased in volume
over the past year. And it's coming from
two sides of the country politically.
It's coming from populists on the left,
people like Bernie Sanders, and
populists on the right, people like
Steve Bannon.
They would all like to see the
government take a more heavy-handed role
in regulating artificial intelligence.
Largely because this is a really
disruptive technology. It's going to
have huge ramifications for the country,
and they believe that there's not being
enough done to put the government at the
forefront of where it's going.
>> Well, let's start with the populist on
the right and what's motivating their
concerns about AI.
>> Artificial intelligence in a free
society are totally and completely
incompatible.
Let me repeat that.
Artificial intelligence in a free
society are absolutely and totally
incompatible, full [snorts]
freaking stop.
>> [music]
>> Steve Bannon has long been skeptical of
Big Tech.
>> A lot of the bro oligarchs
>> and tech [clears throat] bro oligarchs
as he calls them.
>> It's not that I don't think AI has
tremendous benefits. It obviously does.
But, um
>> [music]
>> the downside is so unlimited.
>> Because he's really concerned that
they're going to sell out the American
public, enrich themselves, and they're
going to do it without any transparency
or any accountability.
>> I think [music] that artificial
intelligence that we have to have even
more than regulation. I think we need
even something like a
Geneva Treaty or some sort of arms
treaty. This thing is very dangerous,
very dangerous.
>> And that's where he wants the government
to step in and provide some rules for
the road.
>> And I am a more of a hardliner in this
than anything else I've ever been a
hardliner on.
>> He hasn't been real explicit about what
those rules should be, but he's
definitely channeled what he believes is
the anger building of working-class
people and the uneasiness of
working-class people who are seeing this
big transformative technology barreling
down the tracks at them and feeling like
nobody's in the engine room steering the
train.
>> Right. And he ultimately worries that
these AI bro oligarchs are going to
force Trump to sell out his own base
because Bannon was at the heart of
creating the Trump political message
that appealed so powerfully to that
forgotten American worker.
>> Exactly. And the interesting thing about
this is it's not just an economic
argument that's gotten momentum within
the mega base. There's also a moral
argument that's been building as well.
I stumbled upon this by talking to a
pastor in Texas. You know, in a
conversation with this pastor, I was
like, why did you become part of the uh
AI opposition movement? And he started
doing it because he met with a
parishioner who told him a story about a
friend whose marriage was on the rocks
because he was having a relationship
with an AI companion and it had
completely destroyed and gutted the
relationship he had with his wife. You
know, and this pastor is concerned about
how many other people might wind up in
the same situation in the future.
>> Right. Basically, AI is a road to
perdition, a kind of moral rot.
>> Right. And like, what stress and strain
does this put on kind of the moral
fabric of America?
>> Mhm.
>> And this isn't an isolated thing. There
were more than three dozen pastors who
signed onto a letter with Steve Bannon
urging the Trump administration to
actually sign this executive order that
we spent time talking about. They just
want somebody to take the wheel and they
don't want that somebody to be the tech
industry that seems to have the
president's ear.
>> I wonder if these pastors and Steve
Bannon
are compelled by the executive order the
president signed just a couple days ago.
>> Not really. I mean, they feel like it's
a step forward, but they'd like to see a
bigger step taken. And when I asked one
of the organizers of the letter, what
would you like to really see happen?
They said that one of the things that
they're supportive of is a bipartisan
piece of legislation that Senator Josh
Hawley of Missouri advanced
that would create a national AI system
to evaluate more rigorously and like on
a mandatory basis
artificial intelligence models before
they're released.
>> So something firmer than what the
president is proposing which is
voluntary a forced
basically pre-clearance review process
in which the government determines
whether something is safe enough when it
comes to AI to be used by corporations
and all of us.
>> Exactly.
>> Okay. So what about the populace on the
left specifically Senator Bernie Sanders
who you mentioned a little bit earlier.
What's he calling for?
>> Yeah, first of all it's worth noting
that Bernie Sanders has just gone deep
on artificial intelligence.
>> [music]
>> Claude, this is Senator Bernie Sanders.
>> He's interacting and doing interviews
with Claude the Anthropic system.
>> I have been taking a hard look
>> [music]
>> at how AI
impacts American society
in terms of economics and job loss in
terms of
>> [music]
>> the mental health of our kids in terms
of what it will do to the political
process.
>> He's really trying to immerse himself in
this technology and where it's going and
he's made two proposals.
>> Given the speed at which AI is
developing
>> [music]
>> and the impact it's going to have on so
many aspects of our life
would you support a moratorium
on the development of new AI data
centers?
>> One of which is a moratorium on
artificial intelligence and when I spoke
to Bernie Sanders and asked him about
this moratorium which probably doesn't
have a real shot of becoming law
he said one of the things that's kind of
shocking to him
>> [music]
>> is that given that AI and robotics are
going to impact every man woman and
child in the country you would think
that Congress would be talking about
this.
>> [music]
>> And yet, the conversations about
artificial intelligence aren't really
happening on Capitol Hill. And so,
that's part of the reason that he's
throwing his weight around and trying to
introduce legislation that really sparks
conversation. And the [music] second
proposal may be even more radical than
the first.
>> But Mr. President, the time has come for
us to reclaim what was stolen from us.
>> And that is that the United States
should take a 50% ownership stake in all
of the biggest artificial intelligence
companies as they go public.
>> I will be introducing the American AI
Sovereign Wealth Fund Act. This
legislation would give the public a
direct ownership stake in the largest AI
companies [music] in our country.
>> So, when Anthropic and OpenAI have their
IPOs later this year, as they've said
they plan to do, he said that the US
should get a 50% share of that. It
should go in a AI Sovereign Wealth Fund,
and that the entire country should share
the profits [music] and wealth of those
companies as they continue to grow and
develop.
>> Bottom line,
>> [music]
>> the future of AI and the fate of
humanity must not be decided behind
closed doors by the wealthiest people in
the world. [music]
It is our future. We must decide it.
Let's get it done.
>> That's about as far as you can possibly
imagine from the president's baby step
of give us 30 days to evaluate the
safety of something before it goes out
in the world voluntarily. This would be
the government
owning, controlling the industry
night and day.
>> Yeah, it's a big radical leap from where
the president is at the moment.
>> And suffice it to say
the AI industry not a fan of this
proposal.
>> It was largely met with shock in Silicon
Valley and ridicule from people who
think it's basically unacceptable
socialism.
>> At this point, given how much of a
desire we can see on both sides of the
populous wings of the parties for
regulation of AI,
what is the industry actually willing to
accept at the moment?
>> The industry at the same time these
conversations are happening, seems to be
recognizing that it has a big problem
with the American public at the moment.
That it's got a trust deficit. I mean,
that's pretty clear based on the polling
data that's been coming out, based on
the rise and AI opposition, and then
based on like a very violent act that
happened here in San Francisco. A
Molotov cocktail was thrown at Sam
Altman's home. Sam Altman being the CEO
of OpenAI. And that was a bit of a
wake-up call for everybody in terms of
making people recognize that developing
this technology without any rules also
has risks for the companies who are
pushing it forward. And so, what you've
seen in the wake of the executive order,
and we're just talking like days,
Michael. Like we're this is just a few
days later. OpenAI came out on Wednesday
with its own post encouraging Congress
to sit down and adopt more rigorous
rules for the artificial intelligence
industry. Now, this is a company that
has largely opposed rules up until this
point. And that to me just speaks to the
type of shift that's taking place right
now.
>> Hm. But, is that a genuine request by a
major AI company to be regulated? Is
that just a public relations gesture?
This is also an industry that spends a
lot of money in American politics,
almost all of which seems to be directed
at electing candidates who will not want
to be regulating the industry.
>> It's a great question. As somebody who
covers the industry, it's hard to figure
out at times where Silicon Valley is
going on this.
And OpenAI is a good example.
It's pushing forward this notion that
democratic governments, not private
companies alone,
should determine the rules and
safeguards for the technology that it's
developing. At the same time, one of its
founders, Greg Brockman, is spending
money to try to ensure that the people
being elected to public office support a
relatively hands-off approach, if not a
totally hands-off approach, to
artificial intelligence.
>> Right. I mean, I have the question of
whether
in the end,
what ultimately may lead to meaningful
regulation of this industry is
what leads to meaningful regulation of
any industry, which is some sort of
massive crisis. And the two that come to
mind
are the FAA, the regulatory body over
the commercial airline industry. That
comes into existence after there are
many plane crashes. In the 1950s, the
government says, "We need a regulatory
body to deal with this."
After the financial crisis in 2008, the
US government wakes up and says, "We
need a much more robust set of
regulations around banks and derivatives
and American finance." And so, we get
that regulatory scheme. Is that just at
this point the most likely scenario
in which we get meaningful regulation
for AI. Something goes quite badly
wrong.
>> Given the paralysis on Capitol Hill, I
think that's the right way of looking at
this. That there
there needs to be not just a mythos that
isn't released publicly, but there needs
to be a mythos that has been released,
and the lights need to go out in New
York City or something like that, right?
Maybe that's what moves the ball forward
on this.
But at the same time though, you know,
talking about this, I can't help but
think that here we are in what,
15 years into the social media
revolution that Facebook brought about,
we've been dealing with tremendous
polarization as a consequence of that.
There've been mental health issues for
young people. There've been concerns
about child sexual abuse material.
>> Right, there've been crisis on top of
crisis.
>> And there's not been a single rule
written, right? That segment of the tech
industry remains unregulated. And so,
I can't help but look at this and
wonder, could this kind of nascent
segment of the tech industry, artificial
intelligence, also just run out the
clock in perpetuity?
>> Right, you're raising the real prospect
that tech and AI may defy the history of
crisis and regulation in this country
that we've had with most industry.
>> It has so far.
And it's got a really big bully stick
that it's carrying around. And that is
how much it is driving the US economy.
And we're talking about a third to more
than half of GDP growth at this moment
is coming from artificial intelligence
and the build out of artificial
intelligence.
>> Wow.
>> And that is a big reason that it took so
long for this executive order to be
enacted.
But at the same time, many those
economic benefits aren't being
distributed broadly to everyone. I mean,
they're flowing to the few.
>> Mhm.
>> Across a broad swath of the country,
what people are living with are
anxieties about what this technology is
going to do. Is it going to eliminate my
job? Is it going to result in a data
center in the backyard? Is it going to
break up a family?
If those pain points begin to bleed from
the progressive populist wing and the
MAGA populist wing of the country into a
broader swath of the public, [music]
then the pressure to take action and
have real regulation will be impossible
to ignore.
>> Will Trip,
thank you very much. We appreciate it.
>> Thanks so much for [music] having me.
>> We'll be right back.
>> [music]
>> Here's what else you need to know to be
informed.
>> On this vote, the yays are 215 and the
nays are 208.
The concurrent resolution is adopted.
>> [music]
>> On Wednesday, the Republican-controlled
House of Representatives
>> [music]
>> voted to direct President Trump to
withdraw US forces from the war with
Iran or win approval from Congress to
continue it.
Four Republicans sided [music] with
Democrats in a sign of the growing
bipartisan opposition to a conflict that
is now in its fourth [music] month.
The vote is seen as largely symbolic
because even if the legislation makes
its way to Trump's desk,
>> [music]
>> he's expected to veto it.
Meanwhile, [music]
Iran fired a barrage of missiles and
drones at two US allies, Kuwait and
Bahrain,
undermining the claim made [music] by
the Trump administration that the war is
over.
The attacks in Kuwait proved deadly.
[music]
Iran struck Kuwait's International
Airport, killing one person, injuring
scores of others,
>> [music]
>> and setting an airport terminal on fire.
Today's episode [music]
was produced by Caitlyn O'Keefe, Asta
Chaturvedi, and Diana Win.
It was edited [music] by Mark George and
Annie Minnoff,
and contains music by Marion Lozano, Dan
Powell, [music] and Diane Wong.
Our theme music is by Wonderly.
This episode was engineered by Alyssa
Moxley.
>> [music]
>> That's it for The [music] Daily.
I'm Michael Barbaro.
See you tomorrow.